TITLE: A Grammar and Handbook of Cyrillic Ergative (Кирилик Эргатив)

PHONOLOGY

Cyrillic Ergative has a rich phonemic inventory with 26 consonants and 15 vowels:

Consonants: p, t, k, b, d, g, m, n, ŋ, f, θ, s, ʃ, χ, v, ð, l, r, w, j, tʃ, dʒ, ɬ, h, ɬ̥, r̥
Vowels: a, ɛ, e, i, ɪ, ɔ, o, u, ʊ, ə, ɨ, aɪ, aʊ, ɔɪ, æ

The language features some uncommon sounds like the voiceless lateral fricative ɬ and its voiceless variant ɬ̥, as well as a voiceless trill r̥. The vowel system includes both monophthongs and diphthongs.

ORTHOGRAPHY

Cyrillic Ergative uses a modified Cyrillic alphabet to represent its sounds. Some notable correspondences include:

ŋ -> ң
θ -> ѳ
ʃ -> ш
χ -> х
ð -> ђ
w -> ў
tʃ -> ч
dʒ -> џ
ɬ -> ԓ
ɬ̥ -> ԓ̥
r̥ -> р̥

Vowels are represented as follows:
ɪ -> ӥ
ɔ -> ӧ
ʊ -> ӯ
ə -> ә
ɨ -> ы
æ -> ӕ

Diphthongs are written as combinations of their component vowels.

MORPHOSYNTAX

Cyrillic Ergative exhibits an ergative-absolutive alignment in its verbal morphology. The language marks tense-aspect through suffixes, with four distinctions: nonpast (-шор), immediate past (-тӕт), recent past (-дәў), and remote past (-фыџ).

Verbs agree with both the ergative and absolutive arguments:
- Ergative markers: -ӥԓ (1SG), -ыб (2SG), -ке (3SG), -лә (1PL), -ӥк (3PL)
- Absolutive markers are not explicitly shown in the provided examples

The language distinguishes between inclusive and exclusive first person plural pronouns: нэ (1PLINCL) and сен (1PLEXCL).

Nouns are marked for number with suffixes: -сыч (singular) and -йэ (plural).

Other notable morphemes include:
- -эс: relative clause marker
- -дед: negation marker

SYNTAX

Cyrillic Ergative follows an Object-Verb-Subject (OVS) word order, which is typologically rare. Adjectives precede the nouns they modify (AN), and the language uses prepositions (PN).

Example of OVS order:
смѳеф сэтәсыч ўӧйдӧдедшорке прңиң файтайсыч
the cat-SING eat-NEG-NPAST-3SG its food-SING
"Its food, the cat doesn't eat."

EXAMPLE TEXT

1. Смѳеф ԓўпӕһ ӯк брнушсыч һеңа шуту фурусыч фрѳэн ԓўләкшоркеэс ԓўләкшорке.
   the smart COMP student-SING in our school-SING he be-NPAST-3SG-REL be-NPAST-3SG
   "He is the smartest student in our school."

2. Накен фәта смѳеф смдэссыч р̥арашорке.
   strongly today the wind-SING blow-NPAST-3SG
   "The wind is blowing strongly today."

3. Һеңа смѳеф ѳрѳэн ԓоѳӥсыч снлый битӕсыч нэ брфӧймдәўлә.
   in the sunny meadow-SING a picnic-SING 1PLINCL have-RECPAST-1PL
   "We (inclusive) had a picnic in the sunny meadow."

These examples showcase the OVS word order, verbal morphology, and some of the unique phonological features of Cyrillic Ergative.

LEXICON

A small sample of the lexicon:

брнуш - student
фуру - school
ԓўләк - be
смдэс - wind
р̥ара - blow
битӕ - picnic
брфӧйм - have
ѳрѳэн - sunny
ԓоѳӥ - meadow
фәта - today
накен - strongly
