TITLE: A Grammar and Handbook of Elorian

PHONOLOGY

Elorian has a relatively simple phonological system consisting of 20 consonants and 5 vowels:

Consonants: p, b, t, d, k, g, f, θ, s, x, tʃ, m, n, ɲ, l, ʎ, ɾ, r, j, ʝ
Vowels: a, e, i, o, u

The language includes some less common sounds like the palatal nasal ɲ, the palatal lateral approximant ʎ, and the voiced palatal fricative ʝ. It also distinguishes between a tap ɾ and a trill r.

ORTHOGRAPHY

Elorian uses a Latin-based alphabet with some digraphs and diacritics:

p, b, t, d, c, g, f, th, s, h, ch, m, n, ñ, l, ll, r, rr, y

Most letters correspond directly to their IPA equivalents, with a few exceptions:
- 'c' represents /k/
- 'h' represents /x/
- 'y' represents both /j/ and /ʝ/
- 'th' represents /θ/
- 'll' represents /ʎ/
- 'r' represents /ɾ/, while 'rr' represents /r/

MORPHOSYNTAX

Elorian is an ergative-absolutive language with case marking through postpositional words. The main cases are:

- Ergative (ERG): marked by 'lal'
- Absolutive (ABS): marked by 'ros'
- Instrumental (INS): marked by 'li'

The language does not mark grammatical number on nouns. There is no grammatical gender.

Verbs show agreement with both the ergative and absolutive arguments through suffixes:

- 1SGERG, 2SGERG, 3SGERG, 1PLERG, 2PLERG, 3PLERG
- 1SGABS, 2SGABS, 3SGABS, 1PLABS, 2PLABS, 3PLABS

Other notable morphological features include:
- A relative marker -nir
- A negation suffix -ro
- Comparative and superlative markers 'sin' and 'li' respectively

Elorian uses numeral classifiers, though the specific system is not detailed in the provided information.

SYNTAX

Elorian has an unusual Object-Subject-Verb (OSV) word order for main clauses. This is quite rare among the world's languages.

Other word order features include:
- Noun-Adjective (NA) order
- Noun-Postposition (NP) order

EXAMPLE TEXT

Here are a few example sentences from Elorian with glosses and translations:

1. Nisi sin ibre ocno lal sese ros risanir asnu ros reso umna orrru lela.
   smart COMP student we ERG school ABS in-REL he ABS is with first singular
   "We are smarter students than he is in school."

2. Ocle li silu lene lal ros olno sunonir ocri ros reso umna salo lela.
   hot SUP day year ERG ABS so far-REL today ABS is with third singular
   "Today is the hottest day of the year so far."

3. Sesar lano sin rido lal olnunir etlo ros reso umna salo lela.
   delicious cake COMP i ERG tasted-REL this ABS is with third singular
   "This is the most delicious cake I have tasted."

LEXICON

A small sample of the Elorian lexicon:

nisi - smart
ibre - student
sese - school
efdi - phone
silu - day
lene - year
ussa - book
lano - cake
osne - trees
nase - leaves
sani - wind
ecle - bicycle
sane - movie
ucda - vacation
nara - climate
lusi - office
