INTRO

We are going to develop an interactive web app based on the Interactive Agentic
System for ConLangs.

PHONOTACTICS

We will start with the phonotactics component, where the system will help the
user design the phonotactics for the language based on a target language.

A sample script can be found in

modular_experiments/controlled_phonology_claude.sh

which calls the setup script in

modular_experiments/run_phonology.py

This controls the target language upon which to model the phonotactics, the
interface to the LLM, and the number of refinement iterations to use.

You will first need to read that code to understand how it works.

Then create a web interface where the user can input a target language, the
number of iterations to run for (set a reasonable default such as 10), and an
interface for the user to provide details (securely!) for LLM keys and so
forth. Note that the current interface to Anthropic models uses BotoCore.  See
llm/llm.py for details on the current setup.

Note that each iteration will output a text file, e.g.

phonotactics_00.txt

and (unless there was an error), the corresponding python file

phonotactics_00.py

The text file will generally contain some information about the model's
reasoning, and at later stages what it decided to change.

See, e.g.,

other_experiments_for_paper/outputs/claude/phonology/Welsh

for examples.

WHAT SHOULD BE RETURNED TO THE USER

In what gets returned to the user, the output should show the set of phonemes,
arranged neatly into consonants and vowels, along with some discussion (based on
the LLM's responses) of why the system arrived at the set that it did.

A list of sample words should also be returned, based on the final Python file.

Ultimately we'd like to make it interactive so that users can edit the output if
they are not happy with one or another feature, and for that we will need a way
to update the Python generator.

One caveat is that the user may not be an expert linguist, so you should bear
that in mind when constructing the user-facing parts.

WHERE TO PUT THE CODE

All code should be placed in the directory WebApp.
